---
layout: article
title: Mapper Algorithm
mathjax: true
tags: tda alg_topo
---

The objective of this blog is to document my understanding of the Mapper algorithm[^1] introduced by Singh et al. along with a review of available statistical literature on the Mapper. The textbook by Prof. Tamal Dey[^2] is an extremely helpful source for understanding the topological motivation behind Mapper. In particular, chapters 7 and 9 of the textbook focus on Mapper and its required background. 

Let $\mathcal{X}$ be a finitely triangulable topological space endowed with the topology $\tau_{mathcal{X}}$. Assume that $f:\mathcal{X} \longrightarrow \mathbb{R}$ is the function we want to study. If our intention is to obtain a topological summary, then one obvious option is to obtain barcodes[^3]:
* Let $X_t = \lbrace f^{-1}(-\infty, x_t]  \rbrace$ for $t \in \lbrace 0, \cdots, m \rbrace$ and $-\infty < x_0 < \cdots < x_m < \infty$ be a finite sequence of sub-level sets of $f$.
* This induces a sequence of homology groups connected by inclusion homomorphisms that are studied to obtain **barcodes** as the topological summary.
















[^1]: Singh, G., Memoli, F., & Carlsson, G. (2007). [*Topological Methods for the Analysis of High Dimensional Data Sets and 3D Object Recognition*](https://doi.org/10.2312/SPBG/SPBG07/091-100). In Eurographics Symposium on Point-Based Graphics. The Eurographics Association. 
[^2]: Dey, T., & Wang, Y. (2022). [*Computational Topology for Data Analysis*](10.1017/9781009099950). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
