---
layout: article
title: SECT statistic
mathjax: true
tags: tda alg_topo 
---

The objective of this blog post is to summarize my understanding of the theory and applications behind Smooth Euler Characteristic Transform (SECT) statistic which was first introduced by Crawford et al[^1] in 2020. The SECT statistic summarizes the shape information associated with an object as a collection of smooth curves that lie in a Hilbert space. The "niceness" of a Hilbert space allows us to use different tools from Functional Data Analysis (FDA). The motivation behind SECT comes from the Persistent Homology Transform (PHT) statistic introduced by Turner et al[^2] in 2014. The blog post starts with an introduction to PHT, its properties, and drawbacks. The second section discusses the benefits of having a Hilbert space structure from a statistics point of view. The final section discusses the construction of the SECT statistic.

## Persistent Homology Transform (PHT)
The authors of both PHT and SECT are trying to tackle the problem of how shape information can be quantified in a way that enables us to perform statistical inference. The PHT statistic, introduced by Turner et al[^2], is to model objects in $\mathbb{R}^2$ and $\mathbb{R}^3$. PHT captures shape information as a collection of Persistent Diagrams that we have to work with instead of the object itself. Hence, the resulting space of persistence diagrams needs to be "nice" i.e. a space where we can perform statistical inference. For instance, if one can define a metric over the space of persistence diagrams, then such a metric can be used to compare the shapes of different objects.




















[^1]: Lorin Crawford, Anthea Monod, Andrew X. Chen, Sayan Mukherjee & Raúl Rabadán (2020) **Predicting Clinical Outcomes in Glioblastoma: An Application of Topological and Functional Data Analysis**, *Journal of the American Statistical Association*, 115:531, 1139-1150, DOI: 10.1080/01621459.2019.1671198
[^2]: Turner, K., Mukherjee, S., and Boyer, D. M. (2014), “**Persistent homology transform for modeling shapes and surfaces**,” *Information and Inference*, Oxford University Press (OUP). https://doi.org/10.1093/imaiai/iau011.







