---
layout: article
title: Understanding Temporal Mapper via Lotka-Volterra Dynamics
mathjax: true
tags: tda alg_topo
---

Modeling real-world phenomena such as neural dynamics, population growth, and the spread of infections is of significant interest to researchers and practitioners. In this blog post, I will focus on phenomena that evolve over time. In other words, these phenomena result in time series data. Throughout the blog, I use predator–prey dynamics as an example to explain the key ideas and concepts that come along the way. Most models used to understand such phenomena fall into one of two categories - mechanistic models and data-driven models. 

Mathematicians Vito Volterra and Alfred Lotka, in the 1920s, independently proposed a system of linear differential equations to characterize the oscillating nature of hare and lynx populations observed in Canada. These oscillations were observed and recorded between the years of 1821 and 1914 by a fur-trading company called Hudson Bay Company. The number of hare and lynx in the area were estimated by counting the number of pelts since it is reasonable to assume that the number of hare/lynx pelts is approximately proportional to the number of hare/lynx species. The resulting mathematical model proposed is the classic and well-known Lotka-Volterra model in mathematical biology.

Let $X(t)$ and $Y(t)$ denote, respectively, the number of predators (e.g. lynx) and prey (e.g. hare) at time $t$. Lotka-Volterra model characterizes the predator-prey interactions over time.

\begin{align}
\dfrac{\mathrm{d}X(t)}{\mathrm{d}t} &= \alpha X(t) - \beta X(t) Y(t) \\
\dfrac{\mathrm{d}Y(t)}{\mathrm{d}t} &= -\gamma Y(t) + \delta X(t) Y(t)
\end{align}


- $x$ or $x(t)$ denotes prey population
- $y$ or $y(t)$ denotes predator population
- $\alpha$ represents prey birth rate
- $\beta$ represents predation rate
- $\delta$ represents predator birth rate (from consuming prey)
- $\gamma$ represents predator death rate






## References





